\documentclass[12pt,titlepage]{article}

% \usepackages21{fancyhdr}

\usepackage[printwatermark]{xwatermark}

\usepackage{grffile}
\usepackage{xcolor}
\usepackage{lipsum}
\usepackage{times}
\usepackage{soul}
\usepackage{epsfig}
\usepackage{rotating}
%\usepackage[hyphens]{url}
%\usepackage[breaklinks=true]{hyperref}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{etoolbox}
\appto\UrlBreaks{\do\-}

\usepackage{latexsym}
\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{amsfonts}
\usepackage{amsmath, amsthm, amssymb}
\usepackage{setspace}
\usepackage{natbib}
\usepackage{longtable}
\usepackage{keyval}
\usepackage{caption,subcaption}
\usepackage{arydshln}


\providecommand{\keywords}[1]{\textbf{\normalsize{Keywords: }} \normalsize{#1}}

%% set 1-inch margins
\usepackage{fullpage}

%% APSR submission: no commas in citations between name and year
%% See http://merkel.zoneo.net/Latex/natbib.php
\bibpunct{(}{)}{;}{author-year}{}{;}

% the opening bracket symbol, default = (
% the closing bracket symbol, default = )
% the punctuation between multiple citations, default = ;
% the letter `n' for numerical style, or `s' for numerical superscript style, any other letter for author-year, default = author-year;
% the punctuation that comes between the author names and the year
% the punctuation that comes between years or numbers when common author lists are suppressed (default = ,);

\usepackage{footmisc}
\renewcommand{\footnotelayout}{\doublespacing} % set spacing in footnotes
\newlength{\myfootnotesep}
\setlength{\myfootnotesep}{\baselineskip}
\addtolength{\myfootnotesep}{-\footnotesep}
\setlength{\footnotesep}{\myfootnotesep} % set spacing between footnotes

% make footnote font size same as regular font size in text
\renewcommand{\footnotesize}{\normalsize} 

%% make possessivecite macro since this does not exist in natbib
\newcommand{\possessivecite}[1]{\citeauthor{#1}'s (\citeyear{#1})}

%% Use this for a "DRAFT" watermark
% \newwatermark[allpages,color=pink!30,angle=45,scale=5,xpos=-25,ypos=40]{DRAFT}

%% List all locations for graphics here
\graphicspath{ {../Plots/} }
\begin{document}
\sloppy
\thispagestyle{empty}

%% APSR submission requires double-spaced footnotes
%%\newcommand{\footnote}[1]{\footnote{\doublespacing #1}} %% <-- note \doublespacing here.

\renewcommand{\topfraction}{.85}
\renewcommand{\bottomfraction}{.7}
\renewcommand{\textfraction}{.15}
\renewcommand{\floatpagefraction}{.66}
\renewcommand{\dbltopfraction}{.66}
\renewcommand{\dblfloatpagefraction}{.66}

% \urldef\myurlncsl1\url{foo%.com}
% \begin{document}
% text\footnote{WWW: \myurl}


\title{Voting lines and early voting check-in times in
  Florida\thanks{An earlier version of this manuscript was presented
    at the 2017 Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political Science
    Association.  The authors thank Michael Hanmer for comments and
    staff members from various Florida Supervisor of Elections offices
    for data on early voting check-in times.}\author{David
    Cottrell\thanks{Postdoctoral Research Fellow, Program in
      Quantitative Social Science, Dartmouth College.  6108 Silsby
      Hall, Hanover, NH 03755
      (\texttt{david.cottrell@dartmouth.edu}).} \and Michael C.\
    Herron\thanks{Professor of Government, Dartmouth College.  6108
      Silsby Hall, Hanover, NH 03755-3547
      (\texttt{michael.c.herron@dartmouth.edu}).} \and Daniel A.\
    Smith\thanks{Professor of Political Science, University of
      Florida, 234 Anderson Hall, Gainesville, FL 32611-7325
      (\texttt{dasmith@ufl.edu}).}}\vspace{1cm}\\\keywords{voting
    lines, election administration, turnout, early voting}}

\maketitle \doublespacing 



% \topskip0pt
% \vspace*{\fill}
% \begin{center}
%   \Large{\textbf{Word count: 8,790}}
% \end{center}
%  \vspace*{\fill}

\begin{abstract}
  \noindent 
  How an election is administered affects the cost of voting, and by extension, 
  the extent to which the election is fair in the sense of treating
  all voters equally.  When voting lines are long, the cost of voting
  is raised.  This can have distributional consequences if some voters
  have to wait in line longer than others, as well as potential downstream
  effects, if waiting decreases future electoral participation.  We
  use voter check-in times from Florida---involving 942,166 early
  in-person voters from 2012 and 1,687,217 from 2016---that reveal 
  disproportionately problematic experiences faced by minority voters,
  though we find far fewer such problems in 2016 compared to 2012.
  We estimate that Florida early in-person voters who waited
  excessively in 2012 had a very slightly lower probability of voting
  in 2016, \emph{ceteris paribus}, and this result draws attention to
  the ongoing importance of the cost of voting incurred by lines at the polls and their potential for
  affecting future political activity.

\end{abstract}


% > evid %>% group_by(year) %>% count
% # A tibble: 2 x 2
% # Groups:   year [2]
%    year       n
%   <int>   <int>
% 1  2012  942166
% 2  2016 1687217

\newpage
\section*{Introduction}

Modern democracies are characterized by regular and free elections,
the legitimacy of which can suffer in the face of perceptions of
unfairness \citep{norris2014electoral}.  But what is an unfair
election?  Elections affected by fraud certainly fall in this
category, as \citet{cottrelletal:fraud2016} argue, and elections
conducted in the midst of acrimonious debates over the nature of the
franchise risk being thought of as unfair \citet{hasen:votingwars}.
Fairness can also be in the eye of the beholder:
\citet{sancesstewart:confidence} show how confidence in a given
election outcome can be a function of whether an individual's
preferred candidate won.

Here we consider the contribution of election administration practices
to electoral fairness, and we focus in particular on voting lines.
The lines that develop outside a polling station reflect a combination of
administrative resource allocations as well as the extent of voter
turnout \citep[e.g.,][]{herronsmith:hanoverstudy}.  Starting with the
premise that the cost of voting should be same for all voters, if
lines adversely affect some types of voters more than others, then
they are arguably unfair.  Thus, if we want to know whether a given
election were fair, we must consider the extent to which selected
groups if voters who participated in it were subjected to long lines,
and hence, had a relatively high cost of voting compared to others.

Voting lines are potential issues wherever voters cast their ballots
\emph{in-person}, as opposed to voting remotely via mail.  The vast
majority---over 75\% in 2016 and ---of voters in the United States who cast
ballots in presidential elections do so in-person, either on an
Election Day itself or during a corresponding early voting period
whose duration depends on relevant local laws.\footnote{For details on
  this figure and the composition of the 2016 electorate, see
  \citet{eac:2016}.} In-person voting experiences have a number of
features that are distinct from the experiences of those who vote by
mail, and our interest here is the act of waiting in line.

% Casting an in-person ballot requires traveling to
% a voting precinct; possibly spending time in a line prior to voting;
% authenticating oneself in some fashion to election officials;
% physically registering candidate and ballot measure preferences; and,
% submitting a ballot for tabulation.  


%% 2016 EAC is from p. 10

We draw attention to two important features of voting lines, by which
we mean lines that form \emph{in front of} precincts as opposed to
lines in which voters, already in the act of casting ballots, are
forced to stand.  First, waiting in line to vote constitutes a time
tax \citep{mukherjee:timetax}.  This tax can be negligible---for
example, a voter waits a scant number of seconds prior to initiating
her voting process---or imposing---some of the Florida voters we
describe shortly waited several hours to vote in 2012.  Associated
with a voting line time tax are the distributional questions
associated with all forms of taxation: is the time tax fair and, in
particular, is the burden of this tax spread uniformly across voters
or concentrated on certain types of individuals?

Second, waiting in line is an experience that in principle can have
``downstream'' effects, as characterized by
\citet{pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts}. When an individual is
compelled to pay a relatively high tax in order to participate in a
social or political activity, a natural response might be to avoid the
activity, or substitute for it, in the future. To make matters
concrete, if a line in front of a particular restaurant is long, some
individuals may substitute an alternative eatery for the restaurant in
question, one without an imposing line.\footnote{Alternatively, a line
  in front of a restaurant might be a quality signal, in which case
  the presence of a line might be an incentive to wait in it.  The
  same could be said for voting, and here we ignore the possibility
  that lines form due to potential voters using the presence of lines
  as a means to gather information on whether voting is valuable.}
While it is not \emph{a priori} clear that voting is substitutable in
the way that selecting a restaurant might be, we should not dismiss
outright the possibility that the effect of waiting in line to vote,
which raises the cost of voting, might decrease the likelihood of
voting in the future.  Given the relatively low rate of voter
participation in American presidential elections---approximately 58
percent in 2012 and 60 percent in 2016---any aspect of the voting
experience that might have a depressive effect on turnout should be
considered a matter worthy of study.\footnote{The national turnout
  rate for a general election depends on the way that the number of
  eligible voters in the country is calculated.  The figures cited
  here are from the United States Election Project, available at
  \url{http://www.electproject.org/home} (last accessed December 11,
  2017).\label{fn:uselectionproject}}

These two features of voting lines---time tax and potential downstream
consequences---are conceptually distinct. The time tax for voting
could be uniformly spread across voters, which might be normatively
pleasing, and yet there could be a significant effect of waiting in
line on future electoral participation, which might be less so. Or,
the time tax could be concentrated on certain types of voters, which
most would argue is not fair regardless of whether there are
downstream consequences of waiting to vote. With this in mind, our
empirical analysis of voting lines during early in-person voting in
Florida is divided into two sections. First, with respect to the
notion that waiting in line constitutes a time tax, we assess which
voters are more likely to wait and whether all voters face equal
waiting times when checking in. Second, with respect to the downstream
consequences of waiting in line, we assess whether individuals who
wait to vote are less likely to vote in a subsequent election.

% One of the difficulties in studying voting lines in the United States
% is data availability: it is not easy to determine precisely how long
% voters waited in line at the polls.  It is accordingly difficult to
% study if there are consequences for subsequent voting behavior of
% waiting in line.  Some researchers have dealt with this hurdle by
% using surveys---either Election Day exit polls or post-election
% questionnaires---which integrate responses to waiting time questions
% with other survey items, namely socioeconomic and partisan queries
% \citep{stewart:waitingtovote2012}.  Post-election surveys on voting
% experiences can foster access to wide swaths of voters, and this is
% valuable.  A limitation of surveys regarding electoral experiences,
% though, is that they rely on self-reports of wait times, which may not
% be accurate, and in addition it is known that self-reporting of
% turnout in general can suffer from over-reporting
% \citep{karpbrockington:overreport,bellietal:overreport}.

%In light of potential concern with survey-based evidence on voting
%lines,

In contrast to much of the literature on voting lines, which relies on
surveys, we turn here to a relatively untapped source of information
on voting lines, namely, voter check-in times collected by Florida
counties that recorded check-ins from early voting sites in the 2012
and 2016 General Elections.  The hundreds of thousands of check-in
times which form the basis of our results are not subject to potential
biases arising in self-reports of time spent in line.  Moreover, we
can associate a voter's check-in time with her race/ethnicity, party
registration, and electoral participation, pieces of information
available in Florida's statewide voter file.  Still, in the interests
of being transparent about limitations in our research design, a
voter's check-in time is not directly connected to the amount of time
she spent waiting in line.  We describe below how we link voter
check-in times with corresponding waiting times, but the connection is
not perfect.  Our use of early voting check-in times thus complements
the literature's reliance on survey results.

Regarding the time tax associated with waiting to vote, we find
disproportionate concentration of this tax on minority voters.  The
situation was worse in Florida in 2012 than in 2016, and in general
our collection of check-in times highlights fewer troubling issues in
the latter.  This is consistent with national, survey-based evidence
on voting lines in the 2012 and 2016 General Elections.\footnote{For a
  national 2012 versus 2016 comparison, see
  \url{http://electionupdates.caltech.edu/2016/12/14/this-just-in-lines-at-the-polls-shorter-in-2016-than-in-2012}
  (last accessed March 30, 2017), as well as
  \url{http://www.richmond.com/opinion/their-opinion/guest-columnists/fortier-and-palmer-column-who-waits-the-longest-to-vote/article_81efabad-aa23-577b-83d1-0e524cf844ef.html}
  (last accessed June 30, 2017).}  Whether the recent decrease in
waiting times reflects progress in Florida election administration,
substitution effects and voter sorting, or idiosyncrasies from either
the 2012 or 2016 General Election is not clear.  Two election-years of
data are unlikely to be sufficient to gauge broad progress in a state
as large and heterogeneous as Florida.

Regarding the effect of waiting to vote on future electoral
participation, conditional on our strategy for identifying those
Florida early voters who suffered long waits in 2012, we find small
yet negative consequences regarding turnout in 2016. The consequences
are not completely negligible insofar as long lines do appear to be
associated with lower participation levels; they are, however, small,
and this is consistent with
\citet{pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts}.  Our results have both
positive and normative implications, and we discuss these at length in
the conclusion.

The next section situates our study in the literature on voting lines
and election administration.  We then turn to early voting check-in
times in Florida and explain what these times mean and how they can be
interpreted.  Our results, which leverage check-in times, are divided
into two sections: first we describe the distribution of the voting
time tax across our set of Florida voters, and second we analyze the
downstream effects of the tax.  We conclude with some broader
observations.

\section*{Voting lines in American elections}

% XXX Start here with discussion of fairness etc.
%  Why do we care about lines?  Fairness.  Why is fairness important?
%  Why are elections important?  Need a few paragraphs on this.


``To me,'' Cynthia Perez complained in March 2016 after seeing a long
line wending its way around an early voting center in Maricopa County,
Arizona, with those in line reporting standing in line for more than
three hours before checking in to vote, ``this is not what democracy
is about.''\footnote{This quote is drawn from ``Angry Arizona Voters
  Demand: Why Such Long Lines at Polling Sites?'' \emph{The New York
    Times}, March 24, 2016, available at
  \url{https://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/us/angry-arizona-voters-demand-why-such-long-lines-at-polling-sites.html}
  (last accessed July 17, 2017)} Ahead of the state's 2016
presidential primary, election administrators in Maricopa County had
cut the number of Election Day polling places by roughly 70 percent,
which put greater strain on early voting centers. Voters in a handful
of states also experienced long lines in the 2016 General Election,
but this was nothing compared to what transpired four years earlier in
Florida.\footnote{On various states with line issues in 2016, see
  ``Why Long Voting Lines Could Have Long-Term Consequences,''
  \emph{The New York Times}, November 8, 2016, available at
  \url{https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/09/upshot/why-long-voting-lines-today-could-have-long-term-consequences.html}
  (last accessed December 9, 2017).  On Georgia in particular, see
  ``Early voting lines are so long, people are fainting. That harms
  democracy,'' \emph{The Guardian}, October 19, 2016,
  \url{https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/early-voting-lines-georgia}
  (last accessed December 9, 2017).}  In 2011, the Florida state
legislature curtailed the state's early voting period, which, as some
observers had expected, resulted in long lines for many electors who
tried to vote in person during the truncated early voting period in
the 2012 General Election \citep{herron_smith2014}.  Following the
election and the seemingly inevitable anger over long waits at the
polls, then-United States President Barack Obama formed a Presidential
Commission in early 2013 to address general election administrative
issues in the United States.  In doing so, he highlighted the plight
of 102-year old Desiline Victor, a Haitian-American woman who on
October 27, 2012, waited in line for nearly four hours at Florida's
North Miami Public Library early voting center.  Not surprisingly,
Obama's Presidential Commission devoted some of its January, 2014,
report to long lines, concluding that, ``[A]s a general rule, no voter
should have to wait more than half an hour in order to have an
opportunity to vote'' \citep[p.\ 13,][]{pcea:2014}.\footnote{The
  executive order creating this commission is available at
  \url{https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/2013/03/28/executive-order-establishment-presidential-commission-election-administr}
  (last accessed July 12, 2017).}


% XXX We need to comment on the fact that we are studying lines that
% exist and not what causes them

\subsection*{The use of surveys in election line research}

These anecdotes are striking, and they raise questions about voting
lines in general---in particular, how long voters have to wait, how
much variance there is across the United States in waiting times, and
what consequences lines have, if any, beyond the cost of standing in
line.
v
With few exceptions \citep[e.g.,][]{spencermarkovits:renege,
  herronsmith:hanoverstudy, pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts},
much of what we know about wait times for voters is derived from
survey data. Most notably, \citet{stewart:waitingtovote2012} and his
coauthors have conducted post-election, Internet-based surveys in the
United States following the last three general elections.  These
surveys query voters about their experiences at the polls, and the
surveys include items on estimated wait times.
\citeauthor{stewart:waitingtovote2012}'s \emph{Survey of the
  Performance of American Elections} (SPAE), which surveys 200
individuals in each state and Washington, D.C., along with the
Cooperative Congressional Election Study (CCES), have been used to
gauge relative wait times across states the as well as overall wait
times for different sub-populations of voters.  According to
\citeauthor{stewart:waitingtovote2012}, wait times across the United
States vary considerably, but a state's average wait time tends to be
consistent over time.

Surveys relying on self-reported wait times can serve as valuable
barometers for gauging both individual-level and regional
distributions of voting delays.  For a decade, Floridians have
consistently reported having to endure some of the longest wait times
in the country. In the 2012 General Election, for example, in-person
voters reported on average waiting 39 minutes to cast a ballot, three
times the national average \citep{stewart:waitingtovote2012}.  Surveys
like the SPAE can help identify when during the voting process wait
times are most likely to occur.  In the 2012 General Election,
\citeauthor{stewart:waitingtovote2012} documented that over
three-fifths of early in-person voters nationwide who reported waiting
in line to vote said their wait was primarily during the check-in
stage.

Surveys are also helpful when trying to tease out the possibility of
differential voting line time taxes across sub-populations of voters.
Drawing on 2008 CCES data, \cite{mukherjee:timetax} finds minority
voters were more likely, relative to White voters, to pay such a tax
when queuing to vote. \citet{kimball:voting}, using the 2012 SPAE,
reports that voters in urban areas faced longer lines than rural
voters, and \citet{pettigrew:racegapwaittimes} estimates that
typically non-white voting locations in the United States were
associated with voter wait times approximately twice as long as those
in white locations.  \cite{herron:confidence} use exit polls in
Miami-Dade in 2014 to gauge the polling place experiences of voters
leaving polling stations.  In his study of the 2012 General Election,
which builds on the 2008 General Election research design of
\citet{alvarez:survey}, \cite{stewart:waitingtovote2012} finds that a
voter's race/ethnicity is an important ``individual-level
demographic'' that explains disparate wait times.  ``African Americans
waited an average of 23 minutes to vote,''
\citeauthor{stewart:waitingtovote2012} found, ``compared to only 12
minutes for Whites; Hispanics reported waiting 19 minutes, on
average.''  \citeauthor{stewart:waitingtovote2012} concluded that
these differences in wait times could be ``due to factors associated
with where minority voters live, rather than with minority voters as
individuals'' (pp.\ 457-458).

There are several limitations with the use of survey results to
estimate voter wait times at the polls. First, surveys by construction
draw on voter self-reports.  There are a variety of reasons that
respondents might not recall accurately how long they waited in line
before voting \citep[e.g.,][]{sackettetal:timeflies}, and social
desirability may confound accurate reporting on turnout, leading to
overreporting \citep{ansolhersh:bigdata}.  Second, surveys often do
not distinguish among the various wait times that in-person voters can
experience when parking, queuing up to check-in, filling out ballots,
or processing completed ballots. Third, not all surveys have access to
tens of thousands of respondents.  Given variability across states and
even local jurisdictions in election administration practices,
national surveys may not be not particularly well-suited for assessing
variation in wait times across types of voters and polling places
within a state.

\subsection*{Moving beyond voter line surveys}

In light of limitations with survey data, our approach to voting lines
draws on an alternative source of information: observed check-in times
of voters in Florida who cast their ballots at early in-person polling
sites prior to the 2012 and 2016 General Elections.  In 2016, more
Florida voters---3.88 million---cast early in-person ballots than
voters who mailed in their absentee ballots (2.76 million) or who
voted in person at their local Election Day precincts (2.96 million)
\citep{FDOS:2016vote}. The prevalence of early in-person voting is not
unique to Florida. Across the United States, early voting is
increasingly popular, and for analyses of early voting reforms and
their consequences see \citet{neelyrichardson:earlyvoting},
\citet{gronke:2012}, \citet{gronke:earlyvotingreforms},
\citet{gronketoffey:psychological}, \citet{gronkebaum:growth}, and
\citet{burdenetal:unanticipated}.  Although there are debates in the
literature about the extent to which early voting has changed the
electorate, if at all, here we take this mode of voting as given.

Florida notwithstanding, there is good reason to focus on wait times
during early in-person voting.  Michael P.\ McDonald, on his Election
Project website, estimates that over 23 million voters cast early
in-person ballots in ``advance'' of the November 8, 2016, General
Election, some 17 percent of the 137 million votes
cast.\footnote{These numbers are drawn from the United States Election
  Project; see fn.\ \ref{fn:uselectionproject}.}  If one were to be
concerned that our focus on early voters in Florida limits our scope,
these statistics imply that our results apply to millions of
Americans.

Florida's open records laws make the state an excellent laboratory for
the study of election administration. For example, in their study of
congestion at the polls in Florida in the 2012 General Election,
\cite{herronsmith:closingtimes} obtained precinct-level data detailing
when the last voter in a precinct checked in to vote, when the final
voter in a precinct cast a ballot, or when the last voting optical
scan machine in a precinct was shut down. They find significant
differences in the closing times of precincts within counties,
contingent on a precinct's racial and ethnic composition.  Florida's
laws also provide a wealth of information not only about who votes,
but when and how voters cast ballots.  Drawing on publicly available
voter demographic and vote history data in Florida,
\cite{amos_etal2017} find differences in individual-level turnout
across political party and racial and ethnic categories among
registered voters whose precincts were eliminated or relocated by
local election administrators.  Similarly, by linking multiple
statewide voter files and individual-level early voting files,
\cite{herron_smith2014} are able to demonstrate how reductions in the
number of early voting days following the 2008 General Election were
associated with a drop in early voting in 2012, especially among
minority voters who had cast ballots on the final Sunday of early
voting in 2008, a day of early voting that was eliminated by the state
legislature ahead of the 2012 election.

When it comes to direct election monitoring, however, Florida grants
considerable privacy to voters.  With the exception of those serving
as candidate, political party, or ballot issue representatives, state
law prohibits precinct observers from tracking voting processes inside
a polling place when votes are actively being cast. This effectively
precludes scholars who want to understand why lines form in front or
inside Florida precincts from replicating observational studies of
voter activities in the vein of
\possessivecite{spencermarkovits:renege} study of California and
\possessivecite{herronsmith:hanoverstudy} research on New Hampshire.

\section*{Florida early voting check-in times}

Election administration in the Florida---from registering voters, to
determining precinct sizes, to staffing and locating polling places,
and to setting early voting days and hours---is largely controlled at
the county level within a framework established by the Florida state
legislature. Our early voting check-in times are thus gleaned from
Florida counties.\footnote{We made public records requests to
  individual Florida county Supervisors of Elections, and the data use
  in this paper is based on these requests.  Most counties that we
  contacted were not able to provide us with early voter check-in
  times.}

% , and these times cover check-ins
% across a variety of early voting stations during the 2012 and 2016
% General Elections.  

A Florida voter who wishes to cast his or her ballot early may vote at
any early voting polling location in the county in which he or she is
registered.  This is distinct from in-person, Election Day voting,
during which a registered Florida vote must vote at his or her
assigned precinct.  This flexibility necessitates that a county track
its early voters, and thus, rather than relying on traditional,
paper-based pollbooks to check-in these individuals, as is the case
for Election Day in many Florida counties, the 67 county Supervisors
of Elections in Florida use electronic pollbooks to check-in voters
during the state's early voting period.  These pollbooks are for the
most part known as Electronic Voter iDentification machines, or EViDs
for short.  Although there is variance across Florida counties in
electronic pollbook implementation, for simplicity we refer to all
electronic pollbooks as EViD machines.\footnote{For example, Sarasota
  County uses a different electronic voting system for its early
  voters (phone call with Cathy Fowler, office of the Sarasota
  Supervisor of Elections, on March 31, 2017).}

%% Cathy Fowler:  cfowler@sarasotavotes.com

EViD machines allow county pollworkers to check-in and verify the
registration statuses and identities of Floridians casting early,
in-person ballots. The EViD system is designed to reduce the time it
takes to process early voters, and it fosters synchronization across a
county's early voting centers (important because early voters in
Florida can choose where to cast their ballots) as well as with the
Florida statewide voter database.  More importantly for our purposes,
EViD machines record the check-in times for all early voters, and this
provides us with timestamps that specify when a voter began his or her
voting process. EViD timestamps are recorded to the minute, and using
these timestamps we can, for example, identify early voters who had
not checked-in when polls closed at 7:00pm on a given day of early
voting but nonetheless cast ballots.  Per Florida state law, any
elector in line at 7:00pm is allowed to cast a ballot
\citet{FLStatutes:7pm}.

We have EViD check-in times from six Florida counties: Alachua,
Broward, Hillsborough, Miami-Dade, Orange, and Palm Beach.  Table
\ref{tab:evidcounts} lists the number of EViD timestamps we have from
each.  In the 2012 General Election, there were 2,409,097 total early
ballots cast in Florida, and in 2016, 3,876,753 early
ballots.\footnote{2012 General Election turnout statistics are located
  at \url{http://dos.myflorida.com/media/693340/2012ballotscast.pdf}
  (last accessed December 10, 2017), and comparable 2016 General
  Election statistics at
  \url{http://dos.myflorida.com/media/697842/2016-ge-summaries-ballots-by-type-activity.pdf}
  (last accessed December 10, 2017).}  Our EViD data thus cover
approximately 39 percent and 44 percent of total ballots cast in
Florida in the 2012 and 2016 General Elections,
respectively.\footnote{The numbers in Table \ref{tab:evidcounts} do
  not include 115 EViD check-in times (28 from 2012 and 87 from 2016)
  that are listed as midnight.  We are suspicious that these times are
  not accurate and hence drop them.  Given the total number of EViD
  votes cast, dropping 115 cases is negligible.\label{fn:midnight}}

% > 942166 / 2409097 * 100
% [1] 39.10868
% > 

% > 1687217 / 3876753 * 100
% [1] 43.5214
% > 

\input{county_evid_counts.tex}

EViD timestamps, one per early voter, are not subject to potential
self-reporting biases and hence are presumably more accurate than
surveys of voter times or even within-polling place observations of
when voters checked-in.  Moreover, EViD timestamps as associated with
official Florida voter identification numbers, which we can link to
the nearly 14 million individual voter registration records in
Florida's statewide voter file.  To this end, we merge our EViD
timestamps with statewide voter files that cover the 2012 and 2016
General Elections.\footnote{Per Table \ref{tab:evidcounts}, we
  recorded 942,166 early voters across our six counties in 2012 and
  1,687,217 early voters in 2016.  Of those 2012 early voters, 40,455
  could not be matched to the registration records we have from the
  January 2014 statewide Florida voter extract file.  Of the 2016
  early voters, 969 could not be matched to the registration records
  we have from the January 2016 statewide Florida voter extract file.
  In any analysis that uses demographic or partisan information about
  the voters, we drop those voters who could not be matched to
  registration records.}

% > evid %>% filter (year == 2012) %>% count
% # A tibble: 1 x 1
%        n
%    <int>
% 1 942166
% > evid %>% filter (year == 2016) %>% count
% # A tibble: 1 x 1
%         n
%     <int>
% 1 1687217
% > 


% Despite their advantages, EViD check-in times are not a panacea in
% the quest to understand voting lines and their consequences.  We
% ultimately care about voter wait times, and in this sense our use of
% EViD check-in times has limitations.  An individual check-in time
% indicates when a given voter finished waiting in a line, if there
% were a line to begin with.  However, such a time does not specify
% how long an individual waited to vote, if at all. As such, our
% analysis of check-in times serves as a complement to studies using
% survey and other observational methods to explain who waits in line
% and for how long.

In 2012, all 67 of Florida's counties offered between six and 12 daily
hours of early voting over an eight-day period (Saturday through
Saturday) that ended immediately prior to the General Election,
November 6, 2012.  In 2016, after long-lines in 2012 had apparently
convinced the state legislature to grant counties more flexibility in
offering early voting opportunities, counties were permitted to offer
up to 12 hours of early voting per day, spread over 14 days, ending
the final Sunday before the November 8, 2016, General Election.
Counties were permitted to offer a maximum of 168 total hours of early
voting.\footnote{See Florida Governor Rick Scott's statement, issued
  in the aftermath of the 2012 General Election, available at
  \url{http://www.flgov.com/2013/01/17/governor-rick-scott-statement-on-election-reforms/}
  (last accessed March 31, 2017).}

Figure \ref{fig:tenminhist} displays the distribution of EViD check-in
times on the last Saturday (November 3) of the 2012 General Election
early voting period in two different polling locations in Florida,
one at the Fred B.\ Karl County Center in Hillsborough County and the
other at the West Kendall Regional Library in Miami-Dade County.  The
histograms in this figure describe in ten minute blocks the number of
voters who checked into these two polling stations.  The counts begin
with the first voter who checked-in just as polls opened at 7:00am,
and they end with the last voter who checked-in (regardless of whether
this individual checked-in before or after the official 7:00pm
deadline for poll closing).

\begin{figure}[!ht]
  \caption{Early voting check-in times on Saturday, November 3, 2012, in two Florida locations}
  \label{fig:tenminhist}
  \centering
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{\linewidth}
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.6]{example00.pdf}
    \caption{Fred B.\ Karl County Center, Hillsborough County}
    \label{fig:karlexample}
  \end{subfigure}%
  \\
  \begin{subfigure}[b]{\linewidth}
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.6]{example01.pdf}
    \caption{West Kendall Regional Library, Miami-Dade County}
    \label{fig:kendallexample}
  \end{subfigure}
\end{figure}

Several features of Figure \ref{fig:tenminhist} are notable.  First,
both panels in the figure contain vertical black lines at 7:00pm.
This is the time beyond which additional voters were not allowed to
join a (possibly existing) voting line.  In the Hillsborough County
location (Figure \ref{fig:karlexample}), no check-ins occurred after
7:00pm, and from this it follows that, at 7:00pm, where was no voting
line.  In contrast, the Miami-Dade location (Figure
\ref{fig:kendallexample}) had many post-7:00pm check-ins, the last one
of which occurred around 1:00am on Sunday, November 4.  We thus know
that the last-voting voter at West Kendall Regional Library waited at
least almost six hours to vote.

Figure \ref{fig:tenminhist} incorporates information on voter
self-reported race/ethnicity, and corresponding details are depicted
via bar shading.  Early voters at the Fred B.\ Karl County Center were
primarily white, although there were periods on November 3 when the
fraction of non-white votes was disproportionately high, e.g., toward
the end of the day.  At the West Kendall Regional Library, though, the
vast majority of early voters were non-white.  The fraction of
non-white voters appears roughly consistent across November 3.

Lastly, and very roughly speaking, we observe a flatter or
more-uniform distribution of check-in times at Fred B.\ Karl County
Center than in West Kendall Regional Library.  We will draw on this
fact later, when we try to determine which early voters in our six
counties waited in line, and here we provide some intuition.  Overall,
and as illustrated in Figure \ref{fig:tenminhist}, it appears that
early voting locations in Florida that shut down very late had flatter
distributions of check-in times.  We suspect that this is evidence of
persistent lines.  In contrast, the non-uniformity of check-in times
that we observe in Figure \ref{fig:karlexample} is consistent with
more of an ebb and flow of early voters.  We know that there was not a
line to vote at Fred B.\ Karl County Center at 7:00pm on Saturday,
November 3, this despite the fact that, per check-in times, the Center
was regularly processing voters.

Figure \ref{fig:tenminhist} highlights the value of EViD check-in
times (timestamps, association with race/ethnicity, and so forth) as
well as their limitations (check-ins are not linked to arrivals).  All
data sources have advantages and disadvantages, and we will draw on
the former and attempt to work with the latter as we turn to results.

\section*{Results}

We present results in two sections.  First, we describe patterns in
check-in times across the 2012 and 2016 General Elections with
particular attention to race/ethnicity and partisanship.  Second we
consider the consequences of extensive early voting wait times based
on a identifying assumption we use to characterize individuals who
waited before voting.

\subsection*{Who waits?}

Our analysis of who waits to vote turns in large part on check-in
times that occurred after 7:00pm on a day of early voting.  Any voter
with such a late check-in must have waited to vote.

\subsubsection*{Early voting in 2012}

Across our six counties of interest, there were 78 early voting
stations in 2012.  These serviced a total of 942,166 voters in the
eight day long, 2012 early voting period.\footnote{This ignores the
  small number of EViD check-in times that look suspicious; see fn.\
  \ref{fn:midnight}.  In addition, locations where two or fewer
  individuals recorded votes were dropped from our analysis.  The EViD
  data from Orange County and Palm Beach County in 2012 and 2016, from
  Miami-Dade County in 2016, and from Broward County in 2016 was not
  accompanied with voting locations for each early voter.  To
  determine the location at which these voters case their ballots, we
  match their voterids to a masterfile in Florida that records the
  location of every vote.}  % XXX fix masterfile

%> unique(evid12$county)
%[1] "ALA" "BRO" "HIL" "DAD" "ORA" "PAL"

%> length(unique(evid12$location))
%[1] 78

\begin{figure}[!ht]
  \caption{Number of locations where early votes were cast, 2012
    General Election}
  \label{fig:nrlocs2012}
  \centering
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{number_of_Locations.pdf}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:nrlocs2012} describes by day of early voting and by
hourly window the number of locations across our six counties that
actively served voters.  All locations served early voters virtually
the entire day, and this is evident in the flat line, for the most
part pegged a bit under 80 prior to 7:00pm, at the top of the figure;
the sole exception occurred at the earliest time of the day, during
which a few early voting stations did not have any active voters.

After 7:00pm, however, Figure \ref{fig:nrlocs2012} shows that check-in
uniformity across locations quickly changed.  On early days within
Florida's eight-day long early voting period, there was a steep drop
in active voting locations starting at 7:00pm; note the vertical red
line at this time.  Even with this drop, however, there were still at
least five open locations at 9:00pm on every day of early voting in
the early voting period.  Then, on the last two days of early voting,
November 2 and 3, many early voting locations were open well beyond
7:00pm.  On the final Saturday of early voting, over 30 locations were
still open at 9:00pm, and several locations were continuing to process
voters at midnight.

\begin{figure}[!ht]
\caption{Distribution of check-in times among early voters by hour, 2012
  General Election}
  \label{fig:hist2012}
  \centering
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{histogram_by_hour.pdf}
\end{figure}

Figure \ref{fig:hist2012} displays the total number of voters who
voted early by the hour of the day at which they checked-in. Prior to
7:00pm, EViD check-ins were distributed fairly uniformly across the
day with a small peak before noon.  From 7:00am to 7:00pm, our
aggregated six counties consistently served approximately 70,000
Florida early voters per hour. Then, after 7:00pm, at which point new
voters could not join existing voting lines, the number of voters
served per hour dropped drastically---albeit but not entirely.  A
total of 83,278 (8.8\%) early voters in 2012 across the six counties
cast ballots after 7:00pm. These represent individuals who were in
line at the time the polls closed and were allowed to continue to wait
to vote.  We know that all of these voters had to wait in this way
although we do not know precisely how long each waited.  Of this
group, 36,148 voted after 8:00pm.  These voters waited at least one
hour to vote, and 13,595 voters, who checked-in after 9:00pm, must
have waited at least two hours to vote.

% > evid12 %>% filter(time2 > 19) %>% count()
% # A tibble: 1 × 1
%       n
%   <int>
%   83278

% > evid12 %>% filter(time2 > 20) %>% count()
% # A tibble: 1 × 1
%       n
%   <int>
%   36148

% > evid12 %>% filter(time2 > 21) %>% count()
% # A tibble: 1 × 1
%       n
%   <int>
%   13595

\begin{figure}[!ht]
\caption{Racial/Ethnic composition of early voters by hour, 2012 General Election}
  \label{fig:race2012}
  \centering
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{racial_composition.pdf}
\end{figure}

Aggregating across locations, Figure \ref{fig:race2012} describes the
composition of the 2012 early voting pool by race/ethnicity and by
hour of check-in.  For most of the day, whites were the majority
racial group, followed by blacks, Hispanics, and Asians.  This ranking
is similar to, but does not mirror, Florida's registered voter pool.
In the Florida voter file as of December, 2012, which contains
12,580,602 individuals, approximately 66.4 percent are white, 13.9
percent Hispanic, 13.6 percent black, and 1.63 percent Asian.  As in
years prior, blacks in Florida in 2012 were disproportionate users of
the state's early voting period \citep{herronsmith:souls}.

% mysql> select count(*) from fLvoterfile_dec_2012_extract;
% +----------+
% | count(*) |
% +----------+
% | 12580602 |
% +----------+
% 1 row in set (4.20 sec)

% mysql> select race, count(*) AS num, round(100 * count(*) / (select count(*) from fLvoterfile_dec_2012_extract),2) AS percent from fLvoterfile_dec_2012_extract group by race;
% +------+---------+---------+
% | race | num     | percent |
% +------+---------+---------+
% |    0 |     220 |    0.00 |
% |    1 |   42165 |    0.34 |
% |    2 |  204542 |    1.63 |
% |    3 | 1711107 |   13.60 |
% |    4 | 1748251 |   13.90 |
% |    5 | 8358730 |   66.44 |
% |    6 |  203878 |    1.62 |
% |    7 |   29860 |    0.24 |
% |    8 |       4 |    0.00 |
% |    9 |  281839 |    2.24 |
% |   10 |       5 |    0.00 |
% |   11 |       1 |    0.00 |
% +------+---------+---------+
% 12 rows in set (5.72 sec)

% mysql>

% RACE CODES
% Race Code	Race Description
% 1	American Indian or Alaskan Native
% 2	Asian Or Pacific Islander
% 3	Black, Not Hispanic
% 4	Hispanic
% 5	White, Not Hispanic
% 6	Other
% 7	Multi-racial
% 9	Unknown

What is striking in Figure \ref{fig:race2012}, however, is the
racial/ethnic composition of the early voting pool immediately before
and then after 7:00pm.  Simply put, the pool becomes rapidly non-white
starting around 7:00pm; by the 8:00pm-9:00pm window, the pool is less
than 25 percent white.

\begin{figure}[!ht]
\caption{Partisan composition of early voters by hour and by race, 2012
  General Election}
  \label{fig:party2012}
  \centering
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{partisan_composition_by_race.pdf}
\end{figure}

The party registration of the early voting pool varies slightly with
time although not nearly as starkly as its racial/ethnic composition.
This is illustrated in Figure \ref{fig:party2012}, which describes by
hour the partisan breakdown of all early voters in our six counties as
well as the party breakdown of the four aforementioned racial/ethnic
groups.  We plot party registration as the percent of early voters in
each hour of check-in who are registered Democrats.  While Democrats
made up 54\% of all those who voted early in our set of Florida
counties, we can see from the black line in the figure that this
percentage varied by hour of the day.  Notably, Democrats composed a
greater share of the voters in both the early hours of voting and the
hours after 7:00pm.  Hence, Democrats were disproportionately affected
by voting lines that forced voters to cast their ballots after 7:00pm.

%  XXX Need to check 54% figure above.

If we consider the breakdown of party registration by race/ethnicity,
as in in Figure \ref{fig:party2012}, we can see how this effect might
largely be due to the aforementioned racial/ethnic patterns of voting.
For example, black early voters in Florida were almost entirely
Democratic, regardless of when they checked-in to vote.  Similarly,
the party registration of Hispanic voters---the least Democratic group
in the six counties---remained relatively constant throughout the day.
However we do see a slight trend for white and Asian early voters, who
became increasingly likely to be registered as Democrats as time
progressed.

% > evid12 %>% summarize(pct = mean(party == "DEM"))
% # A tibble: 1 x 1
%        pct
%       <dbl>
% 1 0.5416475

\subsubsection*{Early voting in 2016}

We now turn to early voting in the 2016 General Election.  By the time
this election had occurred, Florida had increased it number of early
voting days from eight to 14, ostensibly in an effort to reduce
congestion. Was this change effective?  Figure \ref{fig:nrlocs2016} is
analogous to the earlier figure that described active early voting
locations.  Here we have data from the same counties as in 2012.
These six counties had 104 early voting stations in place for the 2016
General Election.

% > length(unique(evid16$location))
% [1] 102

\begin{figure}[!ht]
  \caption{Number of locations where early votes were cast, 2016 General
    Election}
  \label{fig:nrlocs2016}
  \centering
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{number_of_locations_2016.pdf}
\end{figure}

Compared to its 2012 version, the most important aspect of Figure
\ref{fig:nrlocs2016} is the pictured dropoff in voter check-ins that
occurred after 7:00pm.  There were indeed check-ins that took place
after this time but not nearly as many as in 2012.  On the busiest day
in 2012, more than half of the polling locations were open past 9:00pm
and more than five were open past midnight.  On the busiest day in
2016, though, only six locations were open past 9:00pm and not one
early voter cast a ballot after 10:00pm.

In the introduction, we commented on improvements in voter wait times
that others, using surveys, have found in 2016 compared to 2012, and
Figure \ref{fig:nrlocs2016} is consistent with findings in the 2012
\citep{spae2012} and 2016 \citep{spae2016} versions of the SPAE.  See
Table \ref{tab:floridaspae}.  Early voting in 2016---at least in the
six Florida counties---appears to represent an improvement over 2012
in terms of reducing congestion, which is presumably tied not only to
the expanded number of sites but also to the number of days and hours
of operation during which voters could cast an early
ballot.\footnote{We use the verb ``appears'' here because of
  voting-level sorting that may affect the types of individuals in
  Florida who cast their ballots prior to a given Election Day.  When
  the Florida state legislature changed the state's early voting
  period between 2012 and 2016, voters may have altered their most
  preferred voting times.}

\input{spae_florida.tex}

\subsubsection*{Late voting in 2012 versus 2016}

Figure \ref{fig:race2012and2016} provides a race/ethnicity-based
perspective on the 2012 versus 2016 comparison for our six counties.
For three key racical/ethnic groups in Florida, black, Hispanic, and
white, the figure shows the total number of check-ins by time,
aggregated across all days in the 2012 and 2016 early voting periods.

Figure \ref{fig:race2012and2016} shows clearly that, not only did more
voters check-in for early voting in 2016 compared to 2012, but fewer
voters voted past 7:00pm.  This is the case for black, Hispanic, and
white voters. Moreover, non-white early voters in Florida had
disproportionately late check-ins in 2012.  We already have seen
evidence of this, but Figure \ref{fig:race2012and2016} shows as well
how this problem did not appear in 2016.  There were slightly more
non-whites with late check-ins in 2016, but the magnitude of the white
versus non-white gap shrunk between the two years.

\begin{figure}[!ht]
  \caption{Distribution of voter check-ins, 2012 General Election versus 2016 General Election}
  \label{fig:race2012and2016}
  \centering
  \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{histogram_by_hour_by_race_2012_2016.pdf}
\end{figure}

Even though 2016 attracted far more early voters than 2012, the
changes made to the early voting period appears to have reduced the
congestion outside of the polls. The increased number of days and
hours may have helped, as these six counties still served roughly the
same number of early voters per day in 2016 (approximately 120,521) as
they did in 2012 (approximately 117,774). 

%  Given reduced prevalence of
% lines in 2016, it is likely that these and other reforms made the
% difference for congestion.

%> 942194/8
%[1] 117774.2
%> 1687304/14
%[1] 120521.7


%% Make a plot using all early voters in all sites, but this is
%% post-midwest!  XXX

\subsection*{Effects of waiting to vote}

We now consider the effects on future electoral political
participation of waiting in line to vote.  In particular, we focus
here on the consequences of waiting in an early voting line in the
2012 General Election on turnout in the 2016 General Election.

We have already noted that the individual-level EViD files we have
include Florida voter identification numbers, and this enables us to
link these files with statewide Florida voter files.  These latter
files specify the elections in which voters participated and, if so,
whether they voted absentee, early in-person, or on Election Day.
Thus, for any early voter in 2012 we can determine whether the
individual voted in the 2016 General Election, assuming that this
individual still lived in Florida as of November, 2016.\footnote{When
  a registered voter moves within Florida, the voter maintains the
  same voter identification number.  Our estimates in this section are
  thus not confounded by the possibility of 2012 early voters moving
  across county lines within Florida.}

The difficulty in our exercise here is twofold.  First, while we know
voter check-in times from our EViD data, we do not know associated
voter wait times \emph{per se}.  To determine wait times precisely we
would have to know early voter arrival times, which are not collected
by election officials or anyone else for that matter.  Hence,
distinguishing those early voters in 2012 who waited in line from
those who did not is a challenge and requires an alternative method
along with some assumptions.  Second, early voters who voted at, say,
9:00am on a given day of early voting may be systematically different
from those who voted at 6:00pm. Consequently, estimating the effect of
voting after closing time---when we know voters have waited in
line---is potentially confounded by voter-level selection.  Hence, we
need to ensure that we control for differences across early voters as
best as we can so that voter selection into time of early voting does
not confound our estimates of the effect of waiting on future
participation.

Our approach is as follows.  We condition on race/ethnicity,
partisanship (as before, measured by party registration), gender, age,
and previous voting history.  And, we make the following assumption:
individuals who voted at Florida early voting locations which stayed
open well past the 7:00pm cutoff time are more likely to have waited
in line than those who voted in voting locations that closed before
7:00pm or at this time exactly.  Moreover, we assume that those who
voted just before the 7:00pm cutoff in early voting locations that
stayed open late are more likely to have waited in line than those who
voted earlier in the day.  We cannot know for sure if these
assumptions hold, but there are reasons to believe that they do.

Take, for example, the two polling locations in Figure
\ref{fig:nrlocs2012}.  The first location---the Fred B.\ Karl County
Center in Hillsborough County---closed on time on November 3,
2012. That is to say, voters in this center voted up to, but not
beyond, 7:00pm.  Therefore, we assume that the Karl Center was not a
congested polling location and that the voters who voted just before
7:00pm did not have to wait in much of a line.  If they did have to
wait in line to vote, then the line remarkably stopped just in time
for the final early voter to check-in right before 7:00pm.  While this
is technically possible, it would be remarkably coincidental.

On the other hand, the second location in Figure
\ref{fig:nrlocs2012}---the West Kendall Regional Library in Miami-Dade
County---remained open until the last early voter checked-in around
1:00am on November 3.  We know with certainty that this last voter
waited in line to vote.  In fact, because all voters had to arrive
before 7:00pm in order to check-in, we know with certainty that he or
she waited at least six hours to vote.  Moreover, we can be fairly
confident that the voters who voted just before 7:00pm here also
waited in line.  Voting that continues past 7:00pm is indicative of a
polling place that was operating essentially at capacity at 7:00pm.
Hence, those voters who voted just before 7:00pm are similarly likely
to have been caught up in a long voting line.

With the above assumptions as background, our strategy for
distinguishing voters who waited in line from voters who did not wait
in line is first to identify those who voted in an an early voting
polling place that closed well past 7:00pm from those who voted in a
polling place that closed on time.  In other words, we attempt to
compare voters who cast their ballots in places like the Fred B.\ Karl
County Center to voters who voted in places like the West Kendall
Regional Library.  More specifically, we want to compare those
individuals who voted closest to the 7:00pm cutoff, since those are
the individuals who we are most confident were affected by the
congestion that caused polling locations to close late.
 
Therefore, we identify all early voters who voted at a polling
location on a day where the last voter checked-in past 7:30pm.  These
are voters who cast ballots at locations where we know the line at the
end of the day was at least 30 minutes long.  In what follows we call
this variable \emph{Over}.  Conditioning on race/ethnicity,
partisanship, gender, age, and previous voting record (whether the
voter voted in the 2008 General Election), we estimate the effect of
voting at a polling location that is congested in 2012---one that goes
``over'' 7:30pm---on the probability of voting in 2016.  To do this we
employ a logistic regression as follows:
\begin{equation*}
  \begin{aligned}
    \textup{Pr}\left(\mathrm{Voted16}_{i} = yes\right) =  \textup{logit}^{-1}&(\beta + \alpha_{Over} + \gamma_{Hour} +
    \sigma_{Over \times Hour} + \upsilon_{Gender}  + \\& \rho_{Race/Ethnicity} +
      \tau_{Age Group} + \psi_{Party} + \pi_{Voted\emph{08}})
  \end{aligned}
\end{equation*}
%
In the above model, $i$ denotes our collection of 2012 early voters
who appear in the history of Florida voting in 2008; $Hour$ indicates
the hour of the day in 2012 at which each voter checked-in, between
7:00am and 7:00pm; $Gender$ indicates whether the voter identifies as
male or female; $Race/Ethnicity$ indicates if the voter
self-identifies as white, black, Hispanic, or Asian; $AgeGroup$
classifies voters according to their 2016 age and bins them into
10-year age groups (20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, and 70+); and,
$Voted08$ and $Voted16$ are indicators for participation in the 2008
and 2016 General Elections.  All told we estimate our logistic
regression based on 709,956 individuals, and coefficient estimates
appear in Table \ref{tab:reg} in the
appendix.\footnote{Our regression drops individuals who have no
  recorded genders.}  %%% XXX Besides gender, need to say where we got
%%% this 709,956 number??

Per Table \ref{tab:reg}, having voted in 2008 in Florida is positively
associated with subsequent voting in 2016, and being older is
associated with greater turnout, \emph{ceteris paribus}.  Our age
estimates in Table \ref{tab:reg} are presumably underestimated; the
regression model excludes the youngest voters in 2016, who could not
legally register to vote in Florida in 2008, and younger registered
voters are, \emph{ceteris paribus}, less likely to turnout
\citep{shinosmith:registrationtiming}.  Table \ref{tab:reg} also shows
that, \emph{ceteris paribus}, men vote less often than women and that
whites vote often than non-whites.  This gender finding is consistent
with \citet{leighleynagler:whovotesnow} although the race result is not.

Our objective is not exploring the relationship between demographic
covariates and turnout in Florida in 2016.  Rather, we want to know
about the marginal effects of waiting in line, and to this end Figure
\ref{fig:prvoting2016} displays graphically the probability of voting
in 2016 for a male Floridian who is 50 years old, black, registered
Democratic, and who also voted in 2008.  The estimates are conditioned
on each hour of the early voting day in 2012. The black points in the
figure are the estimated probabilities of voting in 2016 conditional
on voting at a polling location that closed before 7:30pm; based on
our discussion above, these estimates reflect individuals who likely
did not wait in line.  In contrast, the grey points in Figure
\ref{fig:prvoting2016} are the estimated probabilities of voting in
2016 conditional on casting an early ballot at a polling location that
closed \emph{after} 7:30pm.  These estimates reflect individuals who
likely did wait in line to vote.  Hence, the difference between the
figure's two sets of estimates should reflect the effect of waiting in
line.  Moreover, the effect should be most isolated as one compares
voters casting ballots closer to 7:00pm.

\begin{figure}[!ht]
\caption{Probability of voting in 2016, given 2012 check-in time}
  \label{fig:prvoting2016}
  \centering
    \centering\includegraphics[scale = 0.8]{probability_of_voting_in_2016_over_under.pdf}
\end{figure}

One can see that, beginning at around 2:00pm, there is a small albeit
negative difference between individuals who voted in congested polling
places compared to those in non-congested polling places.  This might
suggest that the lines started in the early afternoon and this is why
a difference is induced so early.  Hence, the reason there is no
difference between congested and non-congested polling places earlier
in the day is plausibly because lines have yet to form. As congested
polling places become congested in the afternoon, we begin to see the
small but significant effect on future participation.  This result
suggests that voting lines have a negative effect on future
participation.  However, the effect is very small, amounting to no
more than a percentage point difference in future turnout.

This result is similar to the conclusions in
\citet{pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts}.  In particular,
\citeauthor{pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts} finds that each hour
an in-person voters spends waiting in line to vote is associated with
a one percentage point drop in future turnout.  To the best of our
knowledge, \citeauthor{pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts} is the
first scholar to try to estimate the effect of waiting in line to vote
on the later propensity to vote, and our findings in this section are
qualitatively similar to his.

We have already alluded to the fact that studying the effects of
waiting in line on future turnout is complicated by the fact that
lines are not randomly assigned to voters.  With this as background,
we estimated our logistic regression using individuals who were
registered to vote in Florida in 2008, 2012, and 2016.  This means
that our analysis excludes very young registrants in, say, 2012, who
were not legally permitted to be registered in Florida as of the 2008
General Election; individuals who moved to Florida from out of state
between the years of 2008 and 2016; registered Floridians who died,
were convicted of committing a felony, or adjudicated mentally
incompetent between 2008 and 2016; and, individuals who moved out of
the state between 2008 and 2016.  Exclusions like these are common in
studies of election administration that rely on observational data.
While there may be idiosyncrasies in the rates at which the above
types of individuals vote---e.g., young voters tend to have
disproportionately low turnout rates
\citep{shinosmith:registrationtiming}---whether these types of
individuals are unusually sensitive to lines is unclear.

%% XX Below might be wrong...
Consider our exclusion of the youngest voters, and as context note
that younger registered voters are \emph{ceteris paribus} less likely
to turn out \cite{shinosmith:registrationtiming} than older
counterparts.  This may lead us to underestimate the effects of long
lines on future turnout, to the extent younger voters were caught in
lines in 2008 or 2012.  With respect to the other categories of
excluded voters, it is difficult to imagine that they are have any
systematic biases although, in principle, sensitivity to lines could
be correlated with the willingness to live in Florida.

% XXX  Add something about early voting use in 2016?  Same model as
% before but different dependent variable?

% XXX Comment on intercept shifts.  That is, what if we plotted
% something else?  Nothing would change re: differences.  Need to say
% this.

%in particular
%if their Election Day polling place is relocated \cite{amos_etal2017}.

\section*{Conclusion}

Democracies are characterized by elections, and we have argued here
that the fairness of a given election is in part a function of the
degree to which the cost of voting in the election is distributed
among different types of voters.  Unfairness increases to the extent
that this distribution is not uniform, and from this it follows that
administrative aspects of elections that affect the cost of elections
are part of the overall calculus of whether an election should be
understood broadly as fair or not.

A notable administrative feature of elections is voting lines, and the
presence of lengthy voting lines in recent United States General
Elections has been of concern, both to scholars and election
officials.  Burdensome wait times not only impose opportunity costs on
those forced to wait in line, but they might also discourage future
electoral participation.  This has encouraged researchers to study the
prevalence of long lines with an eye on who is forced to wait in them
and the extent to which the burden of waiting might affect future
turnout.

Research on voting lines is challenged by the lack of data on wait
times.  Other than noting the times at which polls officially closed
and recording information about voters who voted late, there is little
data collected by election officials that might distinguish between
those who waited in line to vote from those who did not.
Notwithstanding a small number of exceptions, nor are there official
records on how long voters waited.  

% Previous research using election
% records to study lines have thus been limited to examining variables
% like aggregate precinct results
% \citep[e.g.,][]{herronsmith:closingtimes,
%   pettigrew:longlinesminorityprecincts}.  Data limitations have
% prevented these projects from identifying individuals who waited in
% line from those who did not \emph{within} the same precinct.

To overcome the lack of data that identifies who waits in line to
vote, scholars have relied on surveys that ask respondents to recall
their experiences at the polls and report the length of time that they
waited to vote \citep{stewart:waitingtovote2012,
  pettigrew:racegapwaittimes}.  These survey-based analyses have
illuminated important variation in wait times across geographies and
racial/ethnic groups, but associated with them is the caveat that
survey responses are subject to biases associated with self-reporting.

With these points in mind, we add to the literature on voting lines
and election administration by analyzing early voter check-in times in
Florida's 2012 and 2016 General Elections. Using electronic voting
check-in time stamps from Alachua, Broward, Hillsborough, Miami-Dade,
Orange, and Palm Beach Counties, we are able to identify the exact day
and time at which thousands of voters checked-in to vote.  These
check-in times not only provide novel insight into voting patterns
across time but, given some natural assumptions, also allow us to
characterize individual voters who likely waited in line to vote.

Florida's early voting period in 2012 had a significant number of
voters who voted past the official 7:00pm closing time and, therefore,
must have waited in line to vote.  These voters were
disproportionately black, Hispanic, and Democrat---a finding that
coincides with survey results in prior studies of voting lines.  In
2016, we find that congestion observed in 2012 had all but vanished.
Voters rarely voted late into the night in 2016, and most early voting
locations in our Florida counties of interest closed promptly.  Even
though the counties we study in 2016 served as many individual per day
as they had in 2012, they appear to have been more prepared to handle
the high rates of early voting.
  
We estimated the effect that waiting in line has on future
participation.  Using temporal variation in voting across polling
locations, we found a very slight negative effect on participation,
amounting to no more than a one percentage point decrease in the
propensity to vote. The result is similar to that identified by
\citet{pettigrew:racegapwaittimes}.  The effect is small in magnitude,
which is valuable, but any negative effect on future turnout is
normatively troubling.  Not only are some voters penalized by waiting
in line, but a small number of these individuals are then dissuaded
from voting in the future and thus making their voices heard.

What does this say about our notions of electoral fairness?  The 2012
General Election in Florida could have been more fair to the
individuals who participated in it.  We showed that certain types of
2012 voters faced disproportionately long lines---that is,
disproportionately high costs of voting---and then, in some cases, a
downstream effect.  Thus, seemingly minor administrative aspects of
elections, like the resource allocation decisions that affect whether
an election will have lines or not, should be understood not just as
administrative in nature but also as relevant to underlying electoral
fairness.

% Except for the few states that require voters to cast ballots by mail
% (or use drop off boxes), waiting to vote at the polls is likely to
% continue to be an inevitable part of the voting experience for voters
% in certain jurisdictions. Long lines may result in some voters not
% only having to pay a time tax, but they may also serve as a deterrent
% on future voting for some citizens. In Florida, the expansion of the
% number of days, hours, and locations of early voting between the 2012
% and 2016 General Elections likley helped to alleviate some of the
% dealys experienced by those voters who chose to voter during the early
% voting period, especially those casting ballots late in the day.
% Further research needs to be conducted on how such delays at the polls
% may affect future turnout decisions.



%\section*{Appendix}
%\input{../plots/table_out.tex} 

\clearpage
\newpage

\bibliographystyle{apsr}
\bibliography{evid-cites}

\newpage
\appendix
\section*{Appendix}

\input{../plots/table_out.tex} 

\end{document}


 
